---
title: Information Systems continued
tags:
  - Programming Tools
  - Information Systems
---

This is a follow up post on 'Information Systems'. In order to think about the different systems available to us and their pros and cons.
But rather, we can think of this as a data problem.

Imagine having lots of different databases, each database has a cost of retrieving information based on various factors, and there is a cost to lookup which tables are in which database. We are trying to minimise the total cost of retrieving information from the system. With the added requirement that access should be role based.

Now the problem should be simpler to solve and think about, but before we do, I want to convince you that this is the correct problem to solve.

Consider git commit logs, or code, or jira, or any other system mentioned in the previous post. Ultimately, this is a datasource, that can be edited and read from. For this reason, I'm going to treat them like databases. Let's take code as an example, to see what I mean by the costs.

The cost of looking up information from the code is how fast it takes a developer to find information they are after within the code. If a team places high emphasis on readable code, it is to lower this cost, as much as possible. The reason we use design patterns and not spaghetti code is purely to make the code as easy as it could be to read, and lower the cost of looking up information from it. The information is generally valuable.

What is valuable information? I'm still not completely certain, and information which is valuable to me as an engineer is maybe less valuable to a product manager, or a manager. I consider value to be a mixture of the following:
 - reliability, how likely is this information going to be correct
 - referenciability, can this information lead me to other information

I personally place the most emphasis on reliability and less on referenciability. Something which references the reliable information is less valuable than the reliable information itself. Each layer of reference, makes it less valuable.

Hopefully now, you are on board with treating this as a data problem. We have some statements which we know from common sense and engineering practices.

- The fewer indicies in a datasource, the easier search is. Ultimately, we are iterating over all indicies and filtering out as much as possible. The less in each datasource the faster search is.

- Writing data to multiple data sources without a multiple-update system setup leads to inconsistencies of data, and then it becomes hard to know which data is correct.

- Having data relevant to a role being in the datasources that that role can access is good. (Think about replacing role with an application to see if this makes sense from an architecture standpoint)

- Giving struture to the data makes it easier to search, but this also imposes some standard which may be hard to change (think of a select from a structured table vs finding something from a document store)

Despite knowing these and probably more rules about data management, we often forget when it comes to these information systems. We often put all our information in an unstructured brain dump in at least one central system, but also write the same information in other systems. Perhaps after finishing a project, someone will write a summary in the readme file, another brain dump in confluence and yet another in a recorded meeting. Sure enough the third is static and won't be subject to edits, but it is not going to keep up with the project, and will be the slowest to gain information from.
